---
title: "Algebras and Sigma-Algebras"
topic: "Analysis"
chapter: "Measure Theory"
section: "algebras"
layout: note
permalink: "/notes/analysis/measure/algebras/"

subtitle: 
date: 2024-10-11
keywords: analysis, measure theory
published: true
references: "Cohn, Donald. (2013). Measure theory. 2nd revised ed."
---

We state the definitions of two important collections of sets, algebras and $\sigma$-algebras, as well as their algebraic structures. 

<div class='definition' name='Algebras'>
Let $X$ be an arbitrary set. A collection $\mathscr{A}$ of subsets of $X$ is an algebra on $X$ if
<ol type="(a)">
    <li>$X\in\mathscr{A}$,</li>
    <li>for each set $A\in\mathscr{A}$, the set $A^c\in\mathscr{A}$,</li>
    <li>for each finite sequence $A_1,\dots,A_n\in\mathscr{A}$, the set $\bigcup_{i=1}^nA_i\in\mathscr{A}$, and</li>
    <li>for each finite sequence $A_1,\dots,A_n\in\mathscr{A}$, the set $\bigcap_{i=1}^nA_i\in\mathscr{A}$.</li>
</ol>

That is, $\mathscr{A}$ is closed under complimentation, under formation of finite unions, and under formation of finite intersections. 
</div>

<div class='definition' name='$\sigma$-Algebras'>
Let $X$ be an arbitrary set. A collection $\mathscr{A}$ of subsets of $X$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ if
<ol type="(a)">
    <li>$X\in\mathscr{A}$,</li>
    <li>for each set $A\in\mathscr{A}$, the set $A^c\in\mathscr{A}$,</li>
    <li>for each infinite sequence $\{A_i\}\in\mathscr{A}$, the set $\bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_i\in\mathscr{A}$, and</li>
    <li>for each infinite sequence $\{A_i\}\in\mathscr{A}$, the set $\bigcap_{i=1}^\infty A_i\in\mathscr{A}$.</li>
</ol>

Thus, $\mathscr{A}$ is closed under complimentation, under formation of countable unions, and under formation of countable intersections. If $\mathscr{A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on the set $X$, it is convenient to call a subset $A\subseteq X$ $\mathscr{A}$-measurable if $A\in\mathscr{A}$. 
</div>

<div class='proposition' name='Intersection of a collection of $\sigma$-algebras'>
Let $X$ be a set. Then the intersection of an arbitrary nonempty collection of $\sigma$-algebras on $X$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $X$. 
</div>


<details class='proof'>
<summary> Proof. </summary>
Let $\mathscr{C}$ be a nonempty collection of $\sigma$-algebras on $X$, and let $\mathscr{A}$ be the intersection of the $\sigma$-algebras that belong to $\mathscr{C}$. It is sufficient to check that $X\in\mathscr{A}$, is closed under complimentation, and closed under the formation of countable unions. 

<br><br>
The set $X\in\mathscr{A}$ since it belongs to each $\sigma$-algebra that belongs to $\mathscr{C}$. Now suppose that $A\in\mathscr{A}$. Then each $\sigma$-algebra that belongs to $\mathscr{C}$ also contains $A$ and so contains $A^c$; thus $A^c$ belongs to the intersection $\mathscr{A}$ of these $\sigma$-algebras. Finally, suppose that $\{A_i\}\in\mathscr{A}$ and hence to each $\sigma$-algebra in $\mathscr{C}$. Then $\bigcup_i A_i$ belongs to each $\sigma$-algebra in $\mathscr{C}$ and so to $\mathscr{A}$.
</details>

<div class='corollary' name='$\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathscr{F}$'>
Let $X$ be a set, and let $\mathscr{F}$ be a family of subsets of $X$. Then there is a smallest $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ that includes $\mathscr{F}$. 

<br><br>
To say $\mathscr{A}$ is the smallset $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ that includes $\mathscr{F}$ is to say $\mathscr{A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ that includes $\mathscr{F}$ also includes $\mathscr{A}$. If $\mathscr{A}_1$ and $\mathscr{A}_2$ are both smallest $\sigma$-algebras on $X$ that includes $\mathscr{F}$, then $\mathscr{A}_1\subseteq\mathscr{A}_2$ and $\AA_2\subseteq \AA_1$, so $\AA_1=\AA_2$; thus the smallest $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ that includes $\FF$ is unique. 
</div>

<details class='proof'>
<summary> Proof. </summary>
Let $\CC$ be the collection of all $\sigma$-algebras on $X$ that includes $\FF$. Then $\CC$ is nonempty, since it contains the $\sigma$-algebra that consists of all subsets of $X$. The intersection of the $\sigma$-algebras that belong to $\CC$ is, according to Proposition (1), a $\sigma$-algebra; it includes $\FF$ and is included in every $\sigma$-algebra in $\CC$ -- that is, it is included in every $\sigma$-algebra on $X$ that includes $\FF$. 
</details>

The smalleset $\sigma$-algebra is called the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\FF$ and is denoted $\sigma(\FF)$. 

